Hey, what's up guys. My name is TheCherno
and welcome back to my c++ series
Today, we're going to be continuing  on our
adventure in object-orientated programming and talking about inheritance
in c++. So, in object oriented programming
there's a huge huge huge paradigm, and inheritance between classes
is one of the fundamental
aspects of it and one of the most
powerful features that we can actually leverage. Inheritance allows us to
have a hierarchy of classes which relate to each other.
Or in other words, it allows us to have a base class which contains
common functionality and then it allows us to kind of
branch off from that class and create sub-classes from
that initial parent class. The primary
reason why this is so, so, useful is because
it helps us avoid code duplication. Code duplication
refers to whether we have to have the exact same code multiple times
Doing maybe, slightly, different things
and other time just exactly the same thing. Instead of us
repeating ourselves over and over again, we can
put all of our common functionality between classes
into a parent class. And then simply make sub-classes
from that base class. Which either change the functionality
in subtle ways, or introduce entirely new functionality.
But the idea is, inheritance gives us a way to put all
that common code between a number of classes into
a base class so that we don't have to keep repeating ourselves. Kind of like a template.
So, let's take a look at how we can actually define that in our source code.
Suppose that I had an entity class and this was going to govern
pretty much every actual entity that I had in my game.
We have a lot of very very specific entities in our
game. However to some aspect, they will share
functionality. For example, perhaps every entity has
a position inside our game. This might be expressed through
two floats, for example. So we'll have float x and float y.
Next, we might want to give every entity  the ability to move.
Perhaps via a movement method.
So we'll take in an xa and a ya being the amount
that we want to move by. OK, great, so we have got a base entity class.
Which basically says that every single entity we create in our game will have
these traits. Let's go ahead and create a new type of
entity, for example, player. We'll write our player class,
for now with no concept of inheritance. So basically if we were doing
this from scratch and we wanted this player to also have
a position, because it is an entity and it makes sense for it to have
a position inside  out game. We will also want to get it to be able to
move, so we would need the "move" function carried across.
We would basically end up writing  something that looks very
similar to this (entity function) Maybe this player class has extra data that we wanted to store
for example, a name or something like that. We would add this.
You can say that these are actually different classes. However
there's quiet a lot of code that's just been copy and pasted and that's
this entire section. So what we could do here is use the power
of inheritance. We could extend this entity class to
create a new type called player and also have it store
new data such as name. As well as provide
extra functionality, such as a function
that doesn't exist in the base class. And there we go. So now let's get
player to be a subclass of entity. The way we do that is
we write a colon, after the type deceleration, here,
class player, and then we write "public entity"
OK, so now with this line of code that we've written here, a few things actually
happened. The player class now not only has the type "player",
it also has the type "entity". Meaning that it actually
is both of those types. Types in C++
are quiet a complicated topic because on one hand, they don't
really exist. However on the other hand, they kind of do.
Especially if you have certain runtime flags activated.
We're not really going to get in-depth about how this whole thing works
just yet, but definitely something for the future.
The other thing that's occurred is that "player" now has
everything that "entity" has. So all of these class members that we have
such as x and y here, two floats, there are now
also included in here. So, right now we've actually got
four floats total in the player class. We've got these two,
that are just the copy-and-pasted ones. As well as the original
two so let's definitely get rid of all of that duplicated
code here so that we only have everything that's new.
Such as the name, which is a const char pointer, and the
PrintName function which is kind of our additional functionality example.
OK, cool, so the player class is looking really really clean now.
However it is actually an entity, which means that just looking at this class
doesn't actually tell us the whole story. We have to go up and
find